---
title: Privacy Policy
comments: no
---

Your privacy is taken very seriously on this website and we intend to be transparent about how your
information is used.

This privacy policy document outlines the types of personal information is received and collected by
sharats.me and how it is used.

If you have any additional questions, please use the [contact page](/contact.html) to contact us.

## Log Files

This website is hosted with our hosting partner, [Netlify](https://netlify.com>). While we don't
actively save details such as IP addresses, type of browser etc., our hosting provider may, in an
attempt to provide a better user experience. Please review [Netlify's Privacy
Policy](https://www.netlify.com/privacy/) to learn more.

## Cookies & 3rd Party Advertisements

Google, as a third-party vendor, uses cookies to serve ads on your site. Google's use of the DART
cookie enables it to serve ads to your users based on their visit to your sites and other sites on
the Internet. Users may opt out of the use of the DART cookie by visiting the [Google ad and content
network privacy policy](https://www.google.com/privacy_ads.html).

We allow third-party companies to serve ads and collect specific anonymous information when you
visit our website. These companies may use non-personally identifiable information (e.g., click
stream information, browser type, time and date, the subject of advertisements clicked or scrolled
over) during your visits to this and other websites to provide advertisements about goods and
services likely to be of more significant interest to you.

These companies typically use a cookie or third party web beacon to collect this information. To
learn more about this behavioral advertising practice or to opt-out of this type of advertising, you
can visit <http://www.networkadvertising.org/managing/opt_out.asp>.

## Google Adsense

These third-party ad servers or ad networks use technology to the advertisements and links that
appear on sharats.me send directly to your browsers. They automatically receive your IP address when
this occurs. Other technologies (such as cookies, JavaScript, or Web Beacons) may also be used by
the third-party ad networks to measure the effectiveness of their advertisements and / or to
personalize the advertising content that you see.

We/sharats.me have no access to or control over these cookies that are used by third-party
advertisers.

You should consult the respective privacy policies of these third-party ad servers for more detailed
information on their practices as well as for instructions about how to opt-out of specific
practices. sharats.me's privacy policy does not apply to, and we cannot control the activities of,
such other advertisers or websites.

If you wish to disable cookies, you may do so through your browser options. More detailed
information about cookie management with specific web browsers can be found at the browsers'
respective websites.

## Consent

By using our website, you hereby consent to our Privacy Policy and agree to its Terms and
Conditions.
